SIMD-0016: Program Rebatable Account Write Fees (#16)
solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents: proposals/0016-simd-program-rebatable-account-write-fees.md

or add any kind of congestion control mechanism.

## Alternatives Considered

* Having a fixed write lock fee and a read lock fee.

Pros: Simpler to implement, Simple to calculate fees.

Cons: Will increase fees for everyone, dapp cannot decide to rebate fees, (or
not all existing apps have to develop a rebate system). Fees cannot be decided
by the dapp developer. Penalizes everyone for a few bad actors.

* Passing fees for each account by instruction and validating them
  during the execution inside user application code

Pros: High efficiency, minimal performance impact, more generic, no need to
change the account structure.

Cons: Cannot prevent denial of service attacks, or account blocking
attacks that do not call into the respective program

## New Terminology

Program Rebatable Account Write Fees or PRAW Fees: Fees that are decided by the
dapp developer will be charged if a user wants to use the dapp. They will be
applied even if the transaction fails contrary to lamport transfers. The program
can decide to rebate these fees back to the user if certain conditions decided
by dapp developers are met.

> Millilamports: 1/1000 lamports or 10^-3 lamports. PRAW fees are set and used in

Author: Changed to micorolamports per requsted CU, changed the type to u64.
The max PRAW fee that can be set is not 2^42.

runtime. Application developers will be able to rebate these fees through the
new syscall, but only if the transaction succeeds, this way transactions
write-locking the respective accounts will require full fee payment before
program is executed.

Once PRAW fees are paid on an account by the payer they are valid for the whole
transaction, even if the same account is write-locked in multiple instructions.

### Payment

`SetProgramRebatableAccountWriteFees` will be part of the updated compute budget
program. `SetProgramRebatableAccountWriteFees` will take a u64 parameter to set
millilamports per requested CU as the PRAW fees. Instead of having separate
instructions for each compute budget parameter we will have a single instruction
that will set all the compute budget parameters. Compute budget parameters could
be considered as transaction header that sets some parameters for the
transaction. We create a new instruction that takes a vector of parameters. If
similar transaction header parameters appear multiple times then we just take
the first one and ignore the other occurrences. In case of multiple transaction

> headers in the transaction, we take the first occurrence and ignore the others.

Author: Fixed.

```
enum TransactionHeaderParameter {

>   // existing compute budget parameters

Author: added

  SetComputeUnitLimit(u32),
  SetComputeUnitPrice(u64),
  SetLoadedAccountsDataSizeLimit(u32),
  // Limit on maximum of PRAW fees to be paid
  // Fees is set in milli lamports per CU
  SetProgramRebatableAccountWriteFees(u64),
}

enum TransactionHeaderInstruction {
  parameter: Vec<TransactionHeaderParameter>
}

> ```

Reviewer: Thanks for incorporating TLV into the design. Probably need a plan to co-exist/transit from `ComputeBudgetInstruction` to ` TransactionHeaderInstruction`

payer does not have enough funds to pay `other fees`.

Before processing the message, we check if any loaded account has associated
PRAW fees. For all accounts with PRAW fees, the fees paid should be greater than
the required fees. In case of overpayment, the difference is stored in a
variable and will be paid back to the payer in any case. In case the PRAW fees
are insufficiently paid or not paid then the transaction fails with an error
`ProgramRebatableAccountWriteFeesNotPaid`. The payer will pay just `other fees`.
This failure is before the execution of the transaction.

The PRAW fees minus rebates and minus overpayment are transferred to the
respective accounts lamport balance, from where the owner can collect them and
then the rest would be transferred back to the payer.

### Syscall to change PRAW fees

PRAW fees should be considered as set and forget kind of fees by dapp
developers. They are not aimed to control congestion over the network instead
they aim to reduce spamming.

A new syscall will be added to update the PRAW fees:

```
fn update_program_rebatable_account_write_fees(
  account: Pubkey, 

>   milli_lamports_per_cu: u32

Author: Yeah we think u32 is enough in this case, if it is millilamports per requested CUs.
The thing is Account structure in solana barely have 3 more bytes in it, if we do not want to take the route to update the deprecated rent epoch and use PRAW fees instead of it.
This will also save some space on networking level.
But if you prefer u64 then we can change it to microlamports instead of milli lamports and then move also the decimals to set maximum PRAW fees that can be set on an account.

>   milli_lamports_per_cu: u32

Reviewer 2: I think it's ok. Not using word size just made my eyebrows raise

>   milli_lamports_per_cu: u32

Author: Changed to u64 and microlamports per requested CUs

) -> bool;
```

The syscall will take as arguments the account on which fee should be updated
and the millilamports per cu that should be charged and return a true if the

> changes were successful else will return false.

Author: I can add few lines to disallow ownership changes, and remove the bool. Bool is to check if there was an error changing account structure, could be changed by an error though.

The accounts database will need to store the value of millilamports per
requested CU for the account. Changes to update the PRAW fees could be done only
by the authority program. All programs will need to implement special
instructions so that the program admin can use this syscall to update PRAW fees
on the required accounts. Program admin should always be signer for these
instructions.

Setting the millilamports per CU to `0` disables PRAW fees. The maximum amount
of millilamports per CU that could be set will be u32::MAX. Lets assume that the
maximum CU required to update these fees on an account is 1,000 CU. So the
maximum PRAW fees required to update an account (`M`) is

```
M = u32::MAX * 1000 CU * (1/1000) lamports
M = 4.294967296×10^9 * 1000 / 1000
M = 4.294967296 SOLs
```

So this makes sure that admin does not lock itself out from changing the PRAW
fees.

> ### Syscall to read PRAW fees

Author: Yes I think we will need one, I can just mention that we also need to adapt JsonRPC to get this data.

> ### Syscall to read PRAW fees

Author: Added more lines for changes requrired in JSONRPC.

A new syscall will be added to read PRAW fees on an account.

```
fn get_program_rebatable_account_write_fees(
  account: Pubkey
) -> u32;
```

The syscall will take writable account as import and return millilamports per CU.

> 

Reviewer 2: I think documenting what happens in the weird case when `update_program_rebatable_account_write_fees` is called from within a transaction with a PRAW fee already set would be nice.

For example, from such an instruction does `get_program_rebatable_account_write_fees` return the PRAW that was in effect before the transaction instructions started execution, or does it immediately pick up the value passed into `update_program_rebatable_account_write_fees` (former seems more sane?)

Likewise, `rebate_program_rebatable_account_write_fees` still works as expected even if `update_program_rebatable_account_write_fees` was previously used to set the PRAW to 0 from within the same instruction

Author: I will write few more lines on these edge cases.

### Syscall to Rebate

The owner of the account can issue a rebate of the PRAW fees paid to write lock
a specific account. Similar to the update and read PRAW fees this will need to
be exposed through a syscall so that programs can implement custom authorization
and delegate the decision to composing programs.

Simple rebate schemes will verify merely signers, e.g an oracle preventing 3rd
parties from write-locking their price feed. Dexes will need more complex rebate
schemes based on instruction sysvar introspection.

Syscall definition of the rebate mechanism is:

```

> fn rebate_program_rebatable_account_write_fees(

Reviewer 2: Can an instruction make multiple calls into `rebate_program_rebatable_account_write_fees()`? Seems "ok" but a little weird. Either way I think it'd be useful to be explicit about the intended behaviour.

And if multiple calls are permitted, presumably the later `milli_lamports_per_cu` args overwrite the previous and we don't do anything weird like add the `milli_lamports_per_cu` from all calls

Author: By specs it will always take `min(max(rebates), PRAW fees on the account)`

Author: Yeah for simplicity it is better to override the previous rebate instead of adding all rebates.

  account: Pubkey, 
  milli_lamports_per_cu: u32
) -> bool;
```

Rebate takes account on which rebate is issued and the amount of millilamports
per CU that needs to be rebated as input. It returns true of rebate was

> successful false otherwise. In case of multiple rebates on the same account only

Reviewer 2: > It returns true of rebate was successful false otherwise.

In what case would the rebate be unsuccessful. My intuition is that the program should abort here

Author: We can change boolean to an error type.

> the highest amount of rebate will be taken into account. The rebated amount is
> always the minimum of rebate issued by the program and the PRAW fees on the
> account. If program rebates `U64::MAX` it means all the PRAW fees on the account

Reviewer 2: This suggestion is still slightly clunky, maybe it can be reworked better, but it took me a while to realize what was actually going on here:
```suggestion
the highest amount of rebate will be taken into account. The rebated amount is
always the minimum of the largest call to `rebate_program_rebatable_account_write_fees()` and the PRAW fees on the
account. If program rebates `U64::MAX` it means all the PRAW fees on the account
```

  should have a minimum balance of `other fees` + `100` lamports to execute the
  transaction. After successful execution of the transaction, the `100` lamports
  will be rebated by the program and then Solana runtime will transfer them back
  to the payer. So the payer will finally end up paying `other fees` only.

* Fees paid multiple partial rebates case:

  A payer includes instruction `SetProgramRebatableAccountWriteFees(200)` in the
  transaction. The transaction has three instructions (`Ix1`, `Ix2`, `Ix3`).
  There are accounts (`accA`, `accB`) that are write-locked by the transaction
  and each of them has an PRAW fees fee of `100` lamports. Lets consider `Ix1`
  rebates 25 lamports on both accounts, `Ix2` rebates 75 lamports on `accA` and
  `Ix3` rebates 10 lamports on `accB`. In the case of multiple rebates only the
  maximum of all the rebates is applied. Consider the transaction is executed
  successfully. The maximum of all the rebates for `accA` is 75 lamports and
  `accB` is 25 lamports. So a total of 100 lamports are rebated back to the
  payer, `accA` gets 25 lamports and `accB` gets 75 lamports. The payer will end
  up paying `other fees` + `100` lamports.

> * Fees paid full rebates but the execution failed case:

Reviewer 2: Is this really the behaviour we want? If the program executed far enough that it decided the transaction creator earned a rebate, shouldn't it be honour even if the transaction later fails for some other completely unrelated reason? This seems more "fair" in a fully composable world. But I admittedly have probably not thought as hard as you have about this particular case

Author: Yes actually, if we do not want someone to add an instruction that fails at the end so they get the rebate and also maliciously use the program.

Reviewer 2: Got it. Maliciously use in this case means "lock the account for write without paying the PRAW fee" right?

Author: Yeah

---
simd: '0016'
title: Program Rebatable Account Write Fees
authors:
  - Godmode Galactus (Mango Markets)
  - Maximilian Schneider (Mango Markets)
category: Standard
type: Core, Fees
status: Draft
created: 2022-12-23
feature:
---

## Summary

This SIMD will discuss additional fees called Program Rebatable Account Write
Fees or PRAW Fees. These fees are decided and set by the dapp developer to
interact with the dapp. Dapp developers then can decide to rebate these fees if
a user interacts with the dapp as intended and disincentivize the users which do
not. These fees will be applied even if the transaction eventually fails and are
collected on the account on which they were set. These fees would be only
applied if the account is write locked by the transaction. The owner of the
account can do lamport transfer to recover these fees. So instead of fees going
to the validator, these fees go to the **dapp developers**. It will be dapp
developer's responsibility to advertise the required PRAW fees to its users.
These fees will depend on the CU requested by the transaction.

## Motivation

Currently, there is no way for dapp developers to enforce appropriate behavior

> and the way their contracts should be used. Bots spamming on dapps make them

Author: Done

unusable and dapps lose their users/clients because the UX is laggy and
inefficient. Unsuccessful transactions deny block space to potentially valid
transactions which reduces activity on the dapp. For dapps like mango markets or
Openbook increasing fees without any rebates or dynamically based other proposed
mechanisms will punish potentially thousands of users because of a handful of
malicious users. Giving dapps authority more control to incentivize proper
utilization of its contract is the primary motivation for this proposal.

During network congestion, many transactions in the network cannot be processed
because they all want to write-lock the same accounts. When a write lock on an
account is taken by a transaction batch no other batch can use this account in
parallel, so only transactions belonging to a single batch are processed
correctly and all others are retried again or forwarded to the leader of the
next slot. With all the forwarding and retrying the validator is choked by the
transactions write-locking the same accounts and effectively processing valid

> transactions sequentially.

Author: Yeah I agree there is no way around it, but it more signifies that transactions writelocking same accounts are only processed sequential, so there is a limit on how many transactions can be processed per block.

> transactions sequentially.

Reviewer: What went through my mind when reading this section is: transactions writelocking same accounts are sequentialized -> too many such transactions cause _lasting_ choking -> beneficial if to reduce number of such transactions -> PRAW fees could help reduce number of such transactions, maybe even significantly.

> transactions sequentially.

Author: Thats what i want to convey.

specialized trading programs write lock these accounts but never CPI into the
respective programs unless they can extract profit, effectively starving the
actual users for access. With current low cluster fees, it incentivizes spammers
to spam the network with transactions.

Without any proper rebate mechanism for users, Solana fees will increase and it
will lose the edge for being low fees cluster. For entities like market makers,
Solana must remain a low-fee cluster as they have a thin profit margin and have
to quote quite often. The goal of this proposal is to reduce spamming without
really increasing fees for everyone. Encourage users to create proper
transactions. Read the cluster state before creating transactions instead of
spamming. We are motivated to improve the user experience, and user activity and
keep Solana a low gas fee blockchain. Keeping gas fees low and increasing user
activity on the chain will help all the communities based on Solana grow. This
will also help users to gain more control over accounts owned by them.

Note that this proposal does not aim to increase gas fees for all transactions

> or add any kind of congestion control mechanism.

Reviewer: > add any kind of congestion control mechanism.

Isn't PRAW fee a way of ease accounts' congestion?

Author: Not directly at the runtime level. Network congestion mechanism always get confused at very low level. While PRAW fees might be useful to control congestion of few accounts. The control is by discouraging spamming, if dapp is used by many users and network is congested by many valid transactions then PRAW fees cannot help to control the congestion. We can think that prioritization fees are some kind of congestion control mechanism.

applied even if the transaction fails contrary to lamport transfers. The program
can decide to rebate these fees back to the user if certain conditions decided
by dapp developers are met.

### Other terminology

Account `Authority`: The true authority for the account. Let's take an example
of associated token account. A associated token account is a `PDA` derived from
associated token program, where the owner is token program. But the program
internally saves who has the authority over the account. Only token program can
change the data of a token account. For operations like withdrawing tokens, the
authority of the associated token account has to be the signer for the
transaction containing transfer instruction. To receive tokens from another
account, the authority's signature is not required.

`Other Fees`: Fees other than PRAW fees `base fees + prioritization fees`.

## Detailed Design

PRAW fees enable dapp developer to decide who to rebate and who to penalize
through runtime features. In particular, programs needs to be able to penalize,
even if the application is not CPI'd to.

The checks on the PRAW fees will be taken care of by Solana runtime. Total PRAW

> fees paid will be included in the transaction through a special

Reviewer: Total PRAW fees ~paid~ committed ?

Author: Done

> `SetProgramRebatableAccountWriteFees` similar to the `ComputeBudget` program so

Reviewer 3: mention the new program name & instruction and clarify that SetProgramRebatableAccountWriteFees is a TVL

Author: done.

that it is easier to calculate the total amount of fees that will be paid. In
case of nonpayment or partial payment, the program is never executed. This
instruction cannot be CPI'ed into.

Addition of new syscalls to get, set and rebate PRAW fees during program
runtime. Application developers will be able to rebate these fees through the
new syscall, but only if the transaction succeeds, this way transactions
write-locking the respective accounts will require full fee payment before
program is executed.

Once PRAW fees are paid on an account by the payer they are valid for the whole
transaction, even if the same account is write-locked in multiple instructions.

### Payment

`SetProgramRebatableAccountWriteFees` will be part of the updated compute budget
program. `SetProgramRebatableAccountWriteFees` will take a u64 parameter to set

> microlamports per requested CU as the PRAW fees. Instead of having separate

Reviewer: > to set ~micro~lamports (?)  per requested CU as the PRAW fees

Author: done

instructions for each compute budget parameter and PRAW fee we will have a
single instruction that will set all the compute budget and PRAW fee parameters.
Compute budget parameters could be considered as transaction header that sets
some parameters for the transaction. We create a new solana native program
`TransactionHeaderProgram` that decodes the instruction data using a type length
value structure (`TLV`) format and computes the required
`TransactionHeaderParameter`s for the transaction. The `TLV` structure is well
defined for accounts in solana program library repository we will extend the
definition for instruction data. As we have multiple transaction header
parameters we convert instruction data into a list of
`TransactionHeaderParameter`. In case we fail to deserialize the transaction
data, the transaction will fail with an error `InvalidInstructionData`. If same
`TransactionHeaderParameter` is used multiple times or has multiple instructions
using `TransactionHeaderProgram` we return an error `DuplicateInstruction`.
Similarly, if we use old Compute Budget instructions with the new instruction to
set the same parameters we return an error `DuplicateInstruction`.

> Program Id for the program `TransactionHeaderProgram`:

Reviewer 2: @taozhu-chicago - wdyt about this new program versus extending the compute budget program with a single TVL instruction. The new program is somewhat cleaner, but practically it doesn't matter much

Reviewer: > @taozhu-chicago - wdyt about this new program versus extending the compute budget program with a single TVL instruction. The new program is somewhat cleaner, but practically it doesn't matter much

The options are: 
1. leave compute_budget alone, introduce new program with single TVL instruction that overlaps current compute_budget instructions. Then retires compute_budget _program_. Leave a new program with single TVL ix;
2. extend compute_budget program by adding a new TVL instruction that overlaps current compute_budget instructions. Then gradually retires current individual compute_budget _instructions_, at the end have Compute_budget program with a single TVL ix. Then maybe rename "compute budget" to something less confusing with what TVL IX actually does.

After spelling it out, yea, they are practically same. Maybe option 1 has slightly less work.

Author: I also agree with @taozhu-chicago, creating a new program will be less work as we have lower probability to break existing code.

```
TrasactionHeader111111111111111111111111111
```

Definition for transaction header parameters:

```
enum TransactionHeaderParameter {
  // existing compute budget parameters
  RequestHeapFrame(u32),
  SetComputeUnitLimit(u32),
  SetComputeUnitPrice(u64),
  SetLoadedAccountsDataSizeLimit(u32),
  // Limit on maximum of PRAW fees to be paid

>   // Fees is set in micro lamports per CU

Reviewer: Maybe you meant to use microlamports to be in consistency with ComputeUnitPrice? Otherwise, introducing `TransactionHeaderParameter` might be a good opportunity to put term `microlamports` in rest. @mvines @t-nelson wdyt?

Author: Updated to microlamports to be consistent.

fails with an error `InsufficientFunds`. Consider this case the same as if the
payer does not have enough funds to pay `other fees`.

Before processing the message, we check if any loaded account has associated
PRAW fees. For all accounts with PRAW fees, the fees paid should be greater than
the required fees. In case of overpayment, the difference is stored in a
variable and will be paid back to the payer in any case. In case the PRAW fees
are insufficiently paid or not paid then the transaction fails with an error
`ProgramRebatableAccountWriteFeesNotPaid`. The payer will pay just `other fees`.
This failure is before the execution of the transaction.

The PRAW fees minus rebates and minus overpayment are transferred to the
respective accounts lamport balance, from where the owner can collect them and
then the rest would be transferred back to the payer.

### Syscall to change PRAW fees

PRAW fees should be considered as set and forget kind of fees by dapp
developers. They are not aimed to control congestion over the network instead
they aim to reduce spamming.

A new syscall will be added to update the PRAW fees:

```

> fn update_program_rebatable_account_write_fees(

Reviewer 2: nit: Since "PRAW fees should be considered as set and forget kind of fees...", `set_` feels more appropriate than `update_` 
```suggestion
fn set_program_rebatable_account_write_fees(
```

>   account: Pubkey, 

Reviewer 2: nit
```suggestion
  address: Pubkey, 
```

  microlamports_per_requested_cu: u64

> ) -> bool;

Reviewer 2: Maybe this has already been discussed and I forget the outcome. What's the reasoning for returning a `bool` here? I'd expect the syscall to abort the transaction if the account is not writable and owned by the callee

Author: I guess i forgot to update this method. I will update it ASAP.

```

The syscall will take as arguments the account on which fee should be updated
and the microlamports per cu that should be charged and return a true if the
changes were successful else will return false.

The accounts database will need to store the value of microlamports per
requested CU for the account. Changes to update the PRAW fees could be done only

> by the authority program. All programs will need to implement special

Reviewer 2: nit: same thing, but I feel this wording is more precise
```suggestion
by the account owner. All programs will need to implement special
```

instructions so that the program admin can use this syscall to update PRAW fees

> on the required accounts. Program admin should always be signer for these
> instructions.

Reviewer 2: nit: not always, so I suggest removing for clarity. for example this could be done on account initialization when no signer is required
```suggestion
on the required accounts.
```

Setting the microlamports per CU to `0` disables PRAW fees. The maximum amount
of microlamports per CU that could be set will be 2 ^ 42. Lets assume that the
maximum CU required to update these fees on an account is 1,000 CU. So the
maximum PRAW fees required to update an account (`M`) is

```
M = 2^42 * 1000 CU * 10^-6 lamports
M = 4.398046511104 * 10^12 * 1000 * 10^-6
M = 4.398046511104 SOLs
```

So this makes sure that admin does not lock itself out from changing the PRAW
fees.

### Syscall to read PRAW fees

A new syscall will be added to read PRAW fees on an account.

```
fn get_program_rebatable_account_write_fees(
  account: Pubkey

> ) -> Result<()>;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
fn get_program_rebatable_account_write_fee(
  address: Pubkey
) -> u64;
```

1. There's only one PRAW fee per account, drop the `s`
2. address, not account
3. Fixed return arg to include the fee. Also I don't see why this syscall should need to return an `Error` ever.  The transaction probably should abort if the request is for an address that was not passed into the instruction.

```

The syscall will take writable account as import and return microlamports per
CU. It will return an error `InvalidAccountOwner` if the program calling the
syscall is not the owner of the account.

### Syscall to Rebate

> The owner of the account can issue a rebate of the PRAW fees paid to write lock

Reviewer 2: I think this section can be much more explicit about where the rebate goes. iirc, it's to the transaction fee payer? It should help new readers to call this out explicitly

Author: Wrote few more lines.

a specific account. Similar to the update and read PRAW fees this will need to
be exposed through a syscall so that programs can implement custom authorization
and delegate the decision to composing programs.

Simple rebate schemes will verify merely signers, e.g an oracle preventing 3rd
parties from write-locking their price feed. Dexes will need more complex rebate
schemes based on instruction sysvar introspection.

Syscall definition of the rebate mechanism is:

```
fn rebate_program_rebatable_account_write_fees(
  account: Pubkey, 
  microlamports_per_requested_cu: u64

> ) -> Result<()>;

Author: fixed

account, the authority's signature is not required.

`Other Fees`: Fees other than PRAW fees `base fees + prioritization fees`.

## Detailed Design

PRAW fees enable dapp developer to decide who to rebate and who to penalize
through runtime features. In particular, programs needs to be able to penalize,
even if the application is not CPI'd to.

The checks on the PRAW fees will be taken care of by Solana runtime. Total PRAW
fees committed will be included in the transaction through a special parameter
called `SetProgramRebatableAccountWriteFees` so that it is easier to calculate
the total amount of fees that will be paid by the transaction. This parameter
will be part of a new `TransactionHeaderProgram` where all the transaction
parameters will be set through a TVL. In case of nonpayment or partial payment,
the program is never executed. This instruction cannot be CPI'ed into.

Addition of new syscalls to get, set and rebate PRAW fees during program
runtime. Application developers will be able to rebate these fees through the
new syscall, but only if the transaction succeeds, this way transactions
write-locking the respective accounts will require full fee payment before

> program is executed.

Reviewer 4: (runtime behavior clarification)

nit: program is executed. During execution, programs will see payer's balance with PRAW fees fully paid like other fees, regardless a number of rebate syscall is already called or not.

Author: Ok can add a line regarding this.

fails with an error `InsufficientFunds`. Consider this case the same as if the
payer does not have enough funds to pay `other fees`.

Before processing the message, we check if any loaded account has associated
PRAW fees. For all accounts with PRAW fees, the fees paid should be greater than
the required fees. In case of overpayment, the difference is stored in a
variable and will be paid back to the payer in any case. In case the PRAW fees
are insufficiently paid or not paid then the transaction fails with an error
`ProgramRebatableAccountWriteFeesNotPaid`. The payer will pay just `other fees`.
This failure is before the execution of the transaction.

The PRAW fees minus rebates and minus overpayment are transferred to the
respective accounts lamport balance, from where the owner can collect them and
then the rest would be transferred back to the payer.

### Syscall to change PRAW fees

PRAW fees should be considered as set and forget kind of fees by dapp
developers. They are not aimed to control congestion over the network instead
they aim to reduce spamming.The runtime will automatically set the PRAW fee to

> `0` on account creation.

Reviewer 4: nit: on account creation and account assignment to different program as new owner.

Author: Fixed

A new syscall will be added to update the PRAW fees:

```

> fn update_program_rebatable_account_write_fee(

Reviewer 2: oops, I thought this was going to be renamed as follows:
```suggestion
fn set_program_rebatable_account_write_fee(
```

Author: As it is such a big proposal, I missed few spots. I guess i have caught them all.

Reviewer 2: thanks :)

change the data of a token account. For operations like withdrawing tokens, the
authority of the associated token account has to be the signer for the
transaction containing transfer instruction. To receive tokens from another
account, the authority's signature is not required.

`Other Fees`: Fees other than PRAW fees `base fees + prioritization fees`.

## Detailed Design

PRAW fees enable dapp developer to decide who to rebate and who to penalize
through runtime features. In particular, programs needs to be able to penalize,
even if the application is not CPI'd to.

The checks on the PRAW fees will be taken care of by Solana runtime. Total PRAW
fees committed will be included in the transaction through a special parameter
called `SetProgramRebatableAccountWriteFees` so that it is easier to calculate
the total amount of fees that will be paid by the transaction. This parameter
will be part of a new `TransactionHeaderProgram` where all the transaction
parameters will be set through a TVL. In case of nonpayment or partial payment,
the program is never executed. This instruction cannot be CPI'ed into.

Addition of new syscalls to get, set and rebate PRAW fees during program

> runtime. Application developers will be able to rebate these fees through the

Reviewer 4: (i noticed another clarification needs):

Addition of new syscalls to get, set and rebate PRAW fees during program
runtime.

=>

This proposal introduces new syscalls to individually get, set and rebate PRAW fees on addresses owned by a executing program. PRAW fees of accounts will be persisted into account database for the purpose of fee calculation of subsequent transactions. Also, the bank hash calculation is changed to incorporate it. Albeit storage increase for all accounts, rent won't be adjusted to retain compatibility.

Author: Will try to replace deprecated fields in the account structure typically rent epoch. If not possible adding new fields in accounts db will require a proposal of its own. Anyways this proposal aims to get consensus over PRAW fees and the UX of PRAW fees.

new syscall, but only if the transaction succeeds, this way transactions
write-locking the respective accounts will require full fee payment before
starting the execution of the transaction. Rebates will be issued to the payer
after the transaction is executed. During transaction execution, the rebates
will not be reflected in the payer's balance.

Once PRAW fees are paid on an account by the payer they are valid for the whole
transaction, even if the same account is write-locked in multiple instructions.

> 

Reviewer 4: dunno this topic is discussed yet or not. but, 

the existence of write locks of PRAW-fee-enabled accounts must increase CUs even with txes with no ix at all, proportional to the number of those accounts. Otherwise, it works as an obscure lamports transfer mechanism, which cost nothing other than base tx fee. so, this creates security/economic problems..

so, at least, it must consume CU larger than SystemProgram::transfer. (currently, this ix consumes no CU; but planned to be changed).

So add `### Consumption of CUs` subsection under this `## Detailed Design`?

Author: So how much CU is a transfer worth? It's fetching and adding of two numbers and storing the result later.

We already have CU for write locks which will cover fetching and storing the result later. So the transfer is just the addition of two numbers.
I see that default cost for system program is 150 CU in the code. So cost of transfer instruction should be also 150 CUs.

Similarly, loading of PRAW fees can come under write-locking of the account. Checks on PRAW fees should be pretty insignificant. `Set` and `Get` PRAW fees should also be insignificant. I guess only `Rebate` remains.

So 150 CUs per account with PRAW fees + 200 CUs per rebate should do the trick.

I would like opinion of @taozhu-chicago .

Reviewer 4: > So how much CU is a transfer worth? It's fetching and adding of two numbers and storing the result later.
> 
> We already have CU for write locks which will cover fetching and storing the result later. So the transfer is just the addition of two numbers. I see that default cost for system program is 150 CU in the code. So cost of transfer instruction should be also 150 CUs.
> 
> Similarly, loading of PRAW fees can come under write-locking of the account. Checks on PRAW fees should be pretty insignificant.

I know the overall computation is low. But, these additional loads/stores incurs some cycles and pollutes cpu cache in the very perf. sensitive code path. Also, enlarges AccountsIndex. imo, i want to solana to squeeze out every ns. :)

Also, I think every additional use of runtime features should incur additional CUs in general. Otherwise it creates incentive skew, at least theoretically.

Assuming PRAW-enabled accounts is very small, well-optimized impl could employ different code path/data. On the other hand, cost-saving validator could just ignore PRAW-enabled txes altogether when producing blocks.
So, PRAW-enabled txes must pay a bit more than other txes with all others being equal.

> So 150 CUs per account with PRAW fees + 200 CUs per rebate should do the trick.

Lastly, 200 CU for the rebate syscall isn't relevant for the case where PRAW is abused to transfer sol.

Author: I think it is a technical detail and can be discussed while reviewing the PRs.

Reviewer: This is a fair point, accounts loading cost should vary by several factors (eg lock type, account size, account type; #29582 tracks some of these), having PRAW fee can be additional factor. Maybe we can move this discussion to separate thread?

Author: Yes I agree, I can add a section like suggested. Will add details what are CU set for ComputeBudget program, and System Program. What should be CU used for TransactionHeader program and each of the syscall. Will summarize a little bit about 29582 and so CU used are subjected to change during its implementation. 

Would it work for you?

`TransactionHeaderParameter`s for the transaction. The `TLV` structure is well
defined for accounts in solana program library repository we will extend the
definition for instruction data. As we have multiple transaction header
parameters we convert instruction data into a list of
`TransactionHeaderParameter`. In case we fail to deserialize the transaction
data, the transaction will fail with an error `InvalidInstructionData`. If same
`TransactionHeaderParameter` is used multiple times or has multiple instructions
using `TransactionHeaderProgram` we return an error `DuplicateInstruction`.
Similarly, if we use old Compute Budget instructions with the new instruction to
set the same parameters we return an error `DuplicateInstruction`.

Program Id for the program `TransactionHeaderProgram`:

```
TrasactionHeader111111111111111111111111111
```

Definition for transaction header parameters:

```
enum TransactionHeaderParameter {
  // existing compute budget parameters
  RequestHeapFrame(u32),
  SetComputeUnitLimit(u32),
  SetComputeUnitPrice(u64),
  SetLoadedAccountsDataSizeLimit(u32),
  // Limit on maximum of PRAW fees to be paid

>   // Fees is set in microlamports per CU

Reviewer 4: (offtopic: naming: well, microlamports_per_cu is mouthful.. why not `compute_price` or `cu_price`?)

>   SetProgramRebatableAccountWriteFees(u64),

Reviewer 4: naming: i think these `Request` and `Set` are redundant... why not just `HeapFrame(Size)` or `ProgramRebatableAccountWriteFees`?

Author: I tried to have same nomenclature like ComputeBudget, but I am ok if @mvines and @taozhu-chicago agree.

}
```

When the cluster receives a new transaction, with `TransactionHeaderParameter`
instruction is decoded to get the `SetProgramRebatableAccountWriteFees` and then
calculates the total fees required for the transaction message. Then we verify
that the fee-payer has a minimum balance of: `per-transaction base fees` +
`prioritization fees` +
`Microlamports per CU set by SetProgramRebatableAccountWriteFees` *

> `requested CUs set by SetComputeUnitLimit`.

Reviewer 4: nit: replace with `+ PRAW fees`. so that next sentence could be followed nicely?

Where PRAW fees is :
`Microlamports per CU set by SetProgramRebatableAccountWriteFees` *
`requested CUs set by SetComputeUnitLimit`.

If the payer does not have enough balance, the transaction is not scheduled and
fails with an error `InsufficientFunds`. Consider this case the same as if the
payer does not have enough funds to pay `other fees`.

Before processing the message, we check if any loaded account has associated
PRAW fees. For all accounts with PRAW fees, the fees paid should be greater than
the required fees. In case of overpayment, the difference is stored in a
variable and will be paid back to the payer in any case. In case the PRAW fees
are insufficiently paid or not paid then the transaction fails with an error
`ProgramRebatableAccountWriteFeesNotPaid`. The payer will pay just `other fees`.
This failure is before the execution of the transaction.

The PRAW fees minus rebates and minus overpayment are transferred to the
respective accounts lamport balance, from where the owner can collect them and
then the rest would be transferred back to the payer.

> ### Syscall to change PRAW fees

Reviewer 4: how about explicitly mentioning that all input `address`es must be one of `AccountInfo`s given at program's entrypoint with is_writable=true; the getter might be okay with is_writable=false.....

Author: I think this is understood. Changing an account needs to pass `is_writable = true` at the program's entrypoint. Just trying to avoid unnecessary details as proposal is already too long.

  address: Pubkey, 
  microlamports_per_requested_cu: u64
) -> Result<()>;
```

The syscall will take as arguments the account on which fee should be updated
and the microlamports per cu that should be charged and return a `Ok` if the
changes were successful else will return `Err`.

The accounts database will need to store the value of microlamports per
requested CU for the account. Changes to update the PRAW fees could be done only
by the account owner. All programs will need to implement special instructions
so that the program admin can use this syscall to update PRAW fees on the
required accounts.

Setting the microlamports per CU to `0` disables PRAW fees. The maximum amount
of microlamports per CU that could be set will be 2 ^ 42. Lets assume that the
maximum CU required to update these fees on an account is 1,000 CU. So the
maximum PRAW fees required to update an account (`M`) is

```
M = 2^42 * 1000 CU * 10^-6 lamports
M = 4.398046511104 * 10^12 * 1000 * 10^-6
M = 4.398046511104 SOLs
```

So this makes sure that admin does not lock itself out from changing the PRAW
fees.

### Syscall to read PRAW fees

A new syscall will be added to read PRAW fees on an account.

```

> fn get_program_rebatable_account_write_fee(

Reviewer 4: maybe this getter syscall can be called by other programs? or forbid for now? (i don't see any practice use case by other programs...)

Author: No use for other programs actually.

Reviewer 4: also, for this condition (https://github.com/solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents/pull/16/files#r1243174480) not honored, how about returning `-> Result<u64>`?

Author: I mean `get_program_rebatable_account_write_fee` will always return the PRAW fee associated with the account, even if it is not owned by the calling program.  No use for other programs actually, but it would not hurt to let other programs get this data if they want to do some additional checks etc..

the end of the transaction if it is successfully executed. Similar to the set
and read PRAW fees this will need to be exposed through a syscall so that
programs can implement custom authorization and delegate the decision to
composing programs.

Simple rebate schemes will verify merely signers, e.g an oracle preventing 3rd
parties from write-locking their price feed. Dexes will need more complex rebate
schemes based on instruction sysvar introspection.

Syscall definition of the rebate mechanism is:

```
fn rebate_program_rebatable_account_write_fee(
  address: Pubkey, 
  microlamports_per_requested_cu: u64
);
```

Rebate takes account on which rebate is issued and the amount of microlamports
per CU that needs to be rebated as input. It returns void but the transaction
will fail for invalid inputs. In case of multiple rebates on the same account
only the highest amount of rebate will be taken into account. The rebated amount
is always the minimum of the largest call to
`rebate_program_rebatable_account_write_fee()` and the PRAW fees on the
account. If program rebates `U64::MAX` it means all the PRAW fees on the account

> are rebated. The rebate amount cannot be negative. It will return an error

Reviewer 4: so, what happens N where U64::MAX > N > PRAW_fees_on_the_account is given? it's same as the PRAW fees on the account?

Author: Yes all the PRAW fees on account will be rebated.

Then we iterate on accounts to calculate total PRAW fees required (`T`).
Let (`Pi`) be PRAW fee set for ith account.
Let number of accounts loaded be (`L`)

```
T = sum(Pi * C) for i in 0 to L.
```

If M>=T we continue to execute else the transaction fails with an error
`ProgramRebatableAccountWriteFeesNotPaid`.

Let Overpaid amount (`O = M - T`)

After execution, we iterate on the rebates issued to calculate total rebated
amount (`R`), For an account there could be multiple rebates during a
transaction. Consider that there are `N` rebates on ith account. Each rebate
will be represented as `Rin`.

```
R = Sum( min(Pi, max(Rin where n=0 to N)) * C )
```

We then transfer `(Pi - Ri) * C` into each writable account and `O + R` back to
the payer.

### Looking at common cases

For simplicity, we have written examples in total PRAW fees instead of
microlamports per requested CUs.

#### No PRAW fees enabled

* A payer does not include `SetProgramRebatableAccountWriteFees` in the
  transaction. The transaction does not write lock any accounts with PRAW fees.
  Then the transaction is executed without the PRAW fee feature. The payer ends
  up paying other fees.

> * A payer includes `SetProgramRebatableAccountWriteFees(PRAW fees)` in the

Reviewer 4: i think further condition must be present: `non-zero microlamports_per_requested_cu`

  transaction but none of the accounts have any PRAW fees. This case is
  considered an overpay case. The payer balance is checked for
  `other fees + PRAW fees`.
  1. The payer does not have enough balance: Transaction fails with an error
    `Insufficient Balance` and the transaction is not even scheduled for
    execution.
  2. The payer has enough balance then the transaction is executed and PRAW
    fees paid are transferred back to the payer in any case.
  
  Note in this case
    even if there are no PRAW fees involved the payer balance is checked
    against PRAW fees.

#### PRAW fees are enabled

* Fees not paid case:

  A payer does not include `SetProgramRebatableAccountWriteFees` in the
  transaction. The transaction includes one or more accounts with PRAW fees.
  Then the transaction is failed with an error
  `ProgramRebatableAccountWriteFeesNotPaid`. The program is not executed at all.

>   The payer ends up paying only other fees.

Reviewer 4: i think this still allow cheap and effective dos. and validator will be happy to collect the other fees from those dos activities... how about not even being scheduled for execution?

Author: Actually, this is the same way how other errors are handled. I don't think even it is eligible for dos. The transaction is not even executed and the user end up paying the base fees. This is the correct behavior.

Reviewer 4: hmm, unless it's one of kinds of `InsufficientError`s, i think dos is possible like by write-locking on praw-enabled accounts and purposefully attaching cu-heavy precompile ixes.

so that account write block cu limit will be reached just with base fees with pretty low microlamports-per-cu.

also flooding many txes with slightly higher priority fee with large requested cus or write-lock full of praw accounts with alt will be enough to selectively disturb certain addresses even under stake-weighted QOS is in place...

so, i think there's many ways as long as it's included into block.

Reviewer 4: hehe, just saw https://github.com/solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents/pull/16#issuecomment-1611496666.

it looks like stronger protection is needed for praw.... so, i think we should better off rejecting these txes

Author: The transaction is not executed at all if the PRAW free requirement is not met.

Author: I guess you find a type should write *transaction* instead of *program*

---
simd: '0016'
title: Program Rebatable Account Write Fees
authors:
  - Godmode Galactus (Mango Markets)
  - Maximilian Schneider (Mango Markets)
category: Standard
type: Core, Fees
status: Draft
created: 2022-12-23
feature:
---

## Summary

This SIMD will discuss additional fees called Program Rebatable Account Write

> Fees or PRAW Fees. These fees are decided and set by the dapp developer to

Author: As stated in the proposal, this proposal is not targeting the congestion control of the whole cluster by itself. This proposal only aims to give dapp authority more control over the usage of the dapp. It is in the dapp programmers/ authority best interest to set this fee correctly do that they make it hard to spam their dapps but not so high not to discourage users to use the dapp. For congestion control there are other fees that are been discussed.

> Fees or PRAW Fees. These fees are decided and set by the dapp developer to

Reviewer 3: eight bytes to implement program defined account write access control, it's not 16 not 32, eight bytes was enough.  if it's too much we might be able to reduce to less if that's more appropriate. we need at least 4 bits though.

interact with the dapp. Dapp developers then can decide to rebate these fees if
a user interacts with the dapp as intended and disincentivize the users which do
not. These fees will be applied even if the transaction eventually fails and are
collected on the account on which they were set. These fees would be only
applied if the account is write locked by the transaction. The owner of the
account can do lamport transfer to recover these fees. So instead of fees going

> to the validator, these fees go to the **dapp developers**. It will be dapp

Reviewer 3: This is wrong for so many reasons. You argumentation is ad absurdum.
1. The operating system design is poor when process isolation is not guaranteed, not the application design. 
2. Dapp developers need to provide lowest fees to their target users as they try to maximize value / cost of service.

authority of the associated token account has to be the signer for the
transaction containing transfer instruction. To receive tokens from another
account, the authority's signature is not required.

`Other Fees`: Fees other than PRAW fees `base fees + prioritization fees`.

## Detailed Design

PRAW fees enable dapp developer to decide who to rebate and who to penalize
through runtime features. In particular, programs needs to be able to penalize,
even if the application is not CPI'd to.

The checks on the PRAW fees will be taken care of by Solana runtime. Total PRAW
fees committed will be included in the transaction through a special parameter
called `SetProgramRebatableAccountWriteFees` so that it is easier to calculate
the total amount of fees that will be paid by the transaction. This parameter
will be part of a new `TransactionHeaderProgram` where all the transaction
parameters will be set through a TVL. In case of nonpayment or partial payment,
the program is never executed. This instruction cannot be CPI'ed into.

Addition of new syscalls to get, set and rebate PRAW fees during program
runtime. Application developers will be able to rebate these fees through the

> new syscall, but only if the transaction succeeds, this way transactions

Author: Imagine the following transaction,

```
if (I_am_making_profit) {
      cpi_into_the_dapp_ixA()
} else {
 return Ok(())
}
```
 as a dapp authority I want to punish this kind of spamming. Dapp adds PRAW fees on the accounts so that payer will get rebate only if ixA is called. So spammer can get creative, they create a transaction with two instructions. First instruction will call the ixA and second will do something like this:
 
 ```
 I (!i_am_making_profit) {
     return Err(not_making_profit)
}
 ```
 
 So spammer will get rebate from the first instructions and in the second he will fail successfully bypassing the PRAW fees.

> new syscall, but only if the transaction succeeds, this way transactions

Reviewer 3: > additionally, it harms practical composability as the combinatorial complexity of programs leveraging others makes confidence in the success of a transaction if more difficult to reason about.

The reason why dapp chains are popular is that the developers can actually permission on-chain composability and prevent "noisy neighbors". This proposal is aimed at enabling developers on a shared L1 the same level of access control through an economic incentive. Obviously "it harms practical composability", there is no way to ensure process isolation without restricting the current model. End-user transactions using the reference client should simply never fail, it can be completely avoided.

> it seems far more equitable to honor rebates for all logic that was executed in good will up to failure. this would allow for rebating logic to be implemented in one spot at the end of each instruction, having done relevant accounting during its execution

That's an assumption this proposal doesn't make. It should be left to the dapp developer to freely decide when to rebate. Simple ix-level decisions are a special case for infrastructure applications with simple read/write access rules (like pyth). End-user applications often use far more instructions, so a check per instruction is not economical use of CU.

> the feature is being implemented in the runtime, it can side step normal tx execution rules if need be.

That's something we actually didn't consider, it's a largely negative change imo though:
1. it creates harder to reason about semantics for dapp developers. It's way easier to communicate, tx fails -> rebate fails.
2. it allows for exploiting program errors as free rollbacks after fees have been rebated

> those rebates should be honored regardless of the transaction result. that is, program B should not be able to preempt rebates by program A

The signer of the transaction wasted valuable blockspace of program A through his failure to create a successful transaction combining program A and program B. He should reimburse program A roughly the expected profit it could extract from the same amount of blockspace. Program B has the same claim towards the signer from my PoV.

write-locking the respective accounts will require full fee payment before
starting the execution of the transaction. Rebates will be issued to the payer
after the transaction is executed. During transaction execution, the rebates
will not be reflected in the payer's balance.

Once PRAW fees are paid on an account by the payer they are valid for the whole

> transaction, even if the same account is write-locked in multiple instructions.

Author: If it is not clear the writing of the PRAW fees is not taken into account during the transaction. This is important to encourage users to create transactions with more instructions.

### Payment

`SetProgramRebatableAccountWriteFees` will be part of the updated compute budget
program. `SetProgramRebatableAccountWriteFees` will take a u64 parameter to set
lamports per requested CU as the PRAW fees. Instead of having separate
instructions for each compute budget parameter and PRAW fee we will have a
single instruction that will set all the compute budget and PRAW fee parameters.
Compute budget parameters could be considered as transaction header that sets
some parameters for the transaction. We create a new solana native program
`TransactionHeaderProgram` that decodes the instruction data using a type length
value structure (`TLV`) format and computes the required
`TransactionHeaderParameter`s for the transaction. The `TLV` structure is well
defined for accounts in solana program library repository we will extend the

> definition for instruction data. As we have multiple transaction header

Author: Anyways we need to add a way to set PRAW fees. It will be harder to set in compute budget, would be better if it is a part of compute budget instruction. That is why I made it a part of this proposal.

}
```

When the cluster receives a new transaction, with `TransactionHeaderParameter`
instruction is decoded to get the `SetProgramRebatableAccountWriteFees` and then
calculates the total fees required for the transaction message. Then we verify
that the fee-payer has a minimum balance of: `per-transaction base fees` +
`prioritization fees` + `PRAW fees`.

Where PRAW fees is :
`Microlamports per CU set by SetProgramRebatableAccountWriteFees` *
`requested CUs set by SetComputeUnitLimit`.

If the payer does not have enough balance, the transaction is not scheduled and
fails with an error `InsufficientFunds`. Consider this case the same as if the
payer does not have enough funds to pay `other fees`.

Before processing the message, we check if any loaded account has associated
PRAW fees. For all accounts with PRAW fees, the fees paid should be greater than
the required fees. In case of overpayment, the difference is stored in a
variable and will be paid back to the payer in any case. In case the PRAW fees
are insufficiently paid or not paid then the transaction fails with an error
`ProgramRebatableAccountWriteFeesNotPaid`. The payer will pay just `other fees`.

> This failure is before the execution of the transaction.

Author: Presents a dilemma, we have similar case no PRAW fees are paid and account is loaded. In the same case accounts have been loaded but PRAW fees cannot be charged. We will consider this case that theoretically the transaction is not executed at all, so no or very less CU will be used.

The PRAW fees minus rebates and minus overpayment are transferred to the
respective accounts lamport balance, from where the owner can collect them and
then the rest would be transferred back to the payer.

### Syscall to change PRAW fees

PRAW fees should be considered as set and forget kind of fees by dapp
developers. They are not aimed to control congestion over the network instead

> they aim to reduce spamming.The runtime will automatically set the PRAW fee to

Author: Spam is not congestion, congestion can be with relatively normal activity of users.

10K users using a dapp can cause congestion but is not a spam.

Handful users creating transactions such a way that they are only executed correctly if specific criteria is satisfied is spamming. Example,
A user sending thousands of transaction for doing arbitrage if possible without checking the current state of the cluster is spamming. Currently network incentivizes spamming, between two users one who is reading correct state of program and creating meaningful transactions is always disadvantageous to another who write-locking all the accounts belonging to a program, checking if few conditions are satisfied and CPI'ing only if the transaction will made profit.

`0` on account creation. PRAW fee will not be changed if the ownership of the
account changes.

A new syscall will be added to update the PRAW fees:

```
fn set_program_rebatable_account_write_fee(
  address: Pubkey, 
  microlamports_per_requested_cu: u64

> ) -> Result<()>;

Author: `InstructionError`

and the microlamports per cu that should be charged and return a `Ok` if the
changes were successful else will return `Err`.

The accounts database will need to store the value of microlamports per
requested CU for the account. Changes to update the PRAW fees could be done only
by the account owner. All programs will need to implement special instructions
so that the program admin can use this syscall to update PRAW fees on the
required accounts.

Setting the microlamports per CU to `0` disables PRAW fees. The maximum amount
of microlamports per CU that could be set will be 2 ^ 42. Lets assume that the
maximum CU required to update these fees on an account is 1,000 CU. So the
maximum PRAW fees required to update an account (`M`) is

```
M = 2^42 * 1000 CU * 10^-6 lamports
M = 4.398046511104 * 10^12 * 1000 * 10^-6
M = 4.398046511104 SOLs
```

So this makes sure that admin does not lock itself out from changing the PRAW
fees.

### Syscall to read PRAW fees

A new syscall will be added to read PRAW fees on an account.

```
fn get_program_rebatable_account_write_fee(
  address: Pubkey
) -> u64;
```

The syscall will take address as input and return microlamports per

> CU. It will return `0` if no PRAW is set on the address.

Author: @ripatel-jump You mean something like this : 
```
define_syscall!(fn sol_get_epoch_rewards_sysvar(addr: *mut u8) -> u64);
```

I will make sure to update the proposal accordingly.

> CU. It will return `0` if no PRAW is set on the address.

Reviewer 5: i guess we need to improve the SIMD process by enforcing a pseudocode syntax that can be sufficiently mapped onto any reasonable candidate language?

### Syscall to Rebate

The owner of the account can issue a rebate of the PRAW fees paid to write lock
a specific account. The rebate issued will be transferred back to the payer at
the end of the transaction if it is successfully executed. Similar to the set
and read PRAW fees this will need to be exposed through a syscall so that
programs can implement custom authorization and delegate the decision to
composing programs.

Simple rebate schemes will verify merely signers, e.g an oracle preventing 3rd
parties from write-locking their price feed. Dexes will need more complex rebate
schemes based on instruction sysvar introspection.

Syscall definition of the rebate mechanism is:

```
fn rebate_program_rebatable_account_write_fee(
  address: Pubkey, 
  microlamports_per_requested_cu: u64

> );

Author: We want an option to rebate all the fees, if rebate is set to U64::Max.

> );

Reviewer 5: > We want an option to rebate all the fees, if rebate is set to U64::Max.

that's not the case that i'm talking about.  it should fail if the program tries to rebate `101` on an account with PRAW fee `100`.

program `TransactionHeaderProgram` into `TransactionHeaderParameter`s and then
calculate the total fees correctly including the PRAW fees. For purpose of
security we assume that program never rebates the PRAW fees on the accounts.
Wallets should be extended to use these two methods to display user the correct
information.

### Calculation of PRAW Fees and rebates.

User creates a transaction by setting maximum PRAW fees in terms of
microlamports per requested CUs (`m`) and requested CUs (`C`). Solana runtime
will multiply `m` and `C` to calculate total maximum PRAW fees (`M`) payer is
willing to pay, then check if user has enough balance to pay all the fees
including PRAW fees then it will load the accounts required by the transaction.

Then we iterate on accounts to calculate total PRAW fees required (`T`).
Let (`Pi`) be PRAW fee set for ith account.
Let number of accounts loaded be (`L`)

```
T = sum(Pi * C) for i in 0 to L.
```

If M>=T we continue to execute else the transaction fails with an error
`ProgramRebatableAccountWriteFeesNotPaid`.

Let Overpaid amount (`O = M - T`)

After execution, we iterate on the rebates issued to calculate total rebated

> amount (`R`), For an account there could be multiple rebates during a

Author: Program can issue multiple rebates but only the maximum will be taken into account. The rebate will be issued by the runtime only once.

> amount (`R`), For an account there could be multiple rebates during a

Reviewer 5: sounds like this section is not sufficiently defined then

transaction. Consider that there are `N` rebates on ith account. Each rebate

> will be represented as `Rin`.

Author: Thtas the idea.

> will be represented as `Rin`.

Reviewer 5: that's not clear from the description

```
R = Sum( min(Pi, max(Rin where n=0 to N)) * C )
```

We then transfer `(Pi - Ri) * C` into each writable account and `O + R` back to
the payer.

> ### Consumption of CUs

Reviewer 5: these costs should be measured like the rest of the native ops, not extrapolated

Author: Ok noted, will update these costs accordingly once the changes have been done.

they will consume their SOL tokens more rapidly to maintain the attack.

## Security Considerations

If the PRAW fees fee for an account is set too high then we cannot ever mutate
that account anymore. Maximum fees should be set to around 4.398046511104 *
10^12 or 2^42 microlamports per CU, assuming that instruction that updates the
PRAW fees on the accounts will use around 1000 CUs, program owner will need
roughly 4.3980 SOLs to reupdate the PRAW fees. Optimizing the instruction to
update the PRAW fees is a must for dapp developers.

For an account that has collected PRAW fees, to transfer these fees
collected to another account we have to pay PRAW fees to write lock the
account, we can include a rebate in the transaction. In case of
any bugs, while transferring PRAW fees from the account to the
authority, there can be an endless loop where the authority creates a
transaction to recover collected PRAW fees, with an instruction to pay
PRAW fees to modify the account and an instruction to rebate. If the
transaction fails because of the bug, the user fails to recover collected
fees, in turn increasing PRAW fees collected on the account.

## Backwards Compatibility

> This feature does not introduce any breaking changes. The transaction without

Reviewer 5: > This feature does not introduce any breaking changes

it breaks consensus. everything the implementation touches in runtime must be feature gated

Author: Yes agreed, I think it is described.

using this feature should work as it is. To use this feature supermajority of
the validators should move to a branch that implements this feature. Validators
that do not implement this feature cannot replay the blocks with transactions
using PRAW fees they also could not validate the block including transactions
with PRAW fees.

## Additional Notes

If the dapps want to rebate PRAW fees they have to implement very
carefully the logic of rebate. They should be very meticulous before calling
rebate so that a malicious user could not use this feature to bypass

> PRAW fees. Dapp developers also have to implement additional

Reviewer 5: good that you recognized how brittle this proposal is in practice. we need to fix that.  writelock spamming does not come about by demonstration of intelligence by user nor dapp developer.

Reviewer 3: This is not the place to discuss individual's intelligence.

Reviewer 5: ah. _this_ one. apologies this was meant to imply that we're going to get into this situation by greed, not careful thought. i can see how it might be taken as ad hominen if read literally :sweat_smile:
